# GOT Experiments Document

## Building

To build the examples, use `make all`:

```sh
make[1]: Entering directory '/home/gparmer/tmp/got'
gcc -c -fPIC -fno-plt got_lib.c -o got_lib.c.o
gcc -shared -o libgot_lib.so got_lib.c.o
gcc -fPIE -pie -fno-plt got_test.c -o got_test -L. -lgot_lib
make[1]: Leaving directory '/home/gparmer/tmp/got'
```
Autogenerated with command: `make all`.

Currently, this will avoid using the PLT as it isn't necessary if we're going to *eagerly* set up the GOT entries.

## PLT and GOT

Dynamic (shared) libraries enable

- the separate compilation of programs and libraries, and
- the sharing of read-only data in the libraries across programs that use it.

### PIC and PIE

When the dynamic library is linked with PIC, it also enables the code to be mapped into any virtual address, which has security benefits (and/or benefits for Janus).
Even the main program can be compiled as PIE to get some of the same benefits.

```sh
    114e:	8b 0d bc 2e 00 00    	mov    0x2ebc(%rip),%ecx        # 4010 <baz>
```
Autogenerated with command: `objdump -S got_test | grep baz`.

This shows us an example of how the `baz` global variable is accessed from `main` when we use PIE.
Instead of accessing `baz` at a fixed address, we're instead accessing the memory at an offset from the `rip` (instruction pointer) register.
The binary assumes that the data/bss/text/etc sections are all set up contiguously in memory, so the offset from the instruction pointer to that global variable will always be something that is fixed.
Thus, no matter which virtual address the program is mapped at, the code can find `baz` by simply offsetting from `rip`.
Same thing for functions!

```sh
0000000000001129 <local_fn>:
    117a:	e8 aa ff ff ff       	call   1129 <local_fn>
```
Autogenerated with command: `objdump -S got_test | grep local_fn`.

Note that even though `objdump` displays the address of the `local_fn` in the `call` instruction, the `e8` instruction actually uses a relative offset.
For example if the `call` instruction were `117a:       e8 aa ff ff ff`, the offset `aa ff ff ff` is little endian, and if we cast (`0xFFFFAA`) to an integer, it would be `-86`, and `0x117a - 86 = 0x1129`, which is the address of the `local_fn`.

If we look at the library, we see similar logic for variable and function access.

```sh
    1127:	8b 05 db 2e 00 00    	mov    0x2edb(%rip),%eax        # 4008 <baz>
```
Autogenerated with command: `objdump -S libgot_lib.so | grep "<baz>"`.

Here we see access to a global variable within the shared library also uses the PC-relative addressing.

So the conclusion is: with PIC and PIE, we can place the library and executable in any virtual address.
This can be quite useful for us, and it gives us freedom in the booter to decide where objects should be loaded, and removes complexity from the build system.

### GOT

When we want to use a symbol in the library from the program, or a symbol in the program from the library, we have to jump through some hoops.
Neither binary can know at compile-time where the data or function is in the other binary as only the loader learns/knows that information.

```sh
000000000000110c <barfn>:
    110c:	f3 0f 1e fa          	endbr64
    1110:	55                   	push   %rbp
    1111:	48 89 e5             	mov    %rsp,%rbp
    1114:	48 8b 05 bd 2e 00 00 	mov    0x2ebd(%rip),%rax        # 3fd8 <bar-0x3c>
    111b:	8b 00                	mov    (%rax),%eax
    111d:	5d                   	pop    %rbp
    111e:	c3                   	ret
```
Autogenerated with command: `objdump -S libgot_lib.so | grep -A 7 barfn`.

This is a function in the library that is accessing the `bar` variable which should use the GOT.
We can tell because when we access memory using `rip`-relative addressing (see PIC/PIE above), we only read out an address.
The next line has to dereference (recall that `mov (%rax), %eax` dereferences `%rax` and places the result in `%eax`) that value to find the actual global variable.
So accessing a global variable actually requires that we access a global variable *in the GOT*, then use that address to find the variable.

We can see that function calls can also use the GOT, for example when the main program (`got_test`) calls `foofn` in the library:

```sh
    113c:	ff 15 96 2e 00 00    	call   *0x2e96(%rip)        # 3fd8 <foofn@Base>
```
Autogenerated with command: `objdump -S got_test | grep foofn`.

Note that this doesn't require two instructions like the previous example as the `call` instruction enables the dereference operation as part of the instruction semantics (see the `*` at the start).

OK, so where is the GOT, and how is it accessed?
If we look at the dynamic relation information in the library...

```sh
Relocation section '.rela.dyn' at offset 0x4b0 contains 9 entries:
000000003fd0  000500000006 R_X86_64_GLOB_DAT 0000000000004010 foo + 0
```
Autogenerated with command: `readelf -r libgot_lib.so | grep -e foo -e rela.dyn`.


...and in the main program...

```sh
Relocation section '.rela.dyn' at offset 0x610 contains 14 entries:
000000003fd8  000400000006 R_X86_64_GLOB_DAT 0000000000000000 foofn + 0
```
Autogenerated with command: `readelf -r got_test | grep -e foofn -e rela.dyn`.

...we see that we're being told that the symbols in the *other* binary have addresses at specific *offset*s (first column) into the binary.

First, lets look at the library:

```sh
  [ 9] .plt.got
       PROGBITS         0000000000001030  0000000000001030  0
       0000000000000010 0000000000000010  0                 16
--
  [18] .got
       PROGBITS         0000000000003fb8  0000000000002fb8  0
       0000000000000030 0000000000000008  0                 8
--
  [19] .got.plt
       PROGBITS         0000000000003fe8  0000000000002fe8  0
       0000000000000018 0000000000000008  0                 8
```
Autogenerated with command: `readelf -t libgot_lib.so | grep -A 2 ".got"`.

The address (for `foo` in the `rela.dyn` section above) falls into the `.got` section we see here.
Similarly, the `foofn` in the main program falls into the `.got` section.

```sh
  [13] .plt.got
       PROGBITS         0000000000001030  0000000000001030  0
       0000000000000010 0000000000000010  0                 16
--
  [23] .got
       PROGBITS         0000000000003fa8  0000000000002fa8  0
       0000000000000058 0000000000000008  0                 8
```
Autogenerated with command: `readelf -t got_test | grep -A 2 ".got"`.

These locations in the `.got` section designate where the pointers need to be populated by the loader for that specific symbol.

This means that all that we need to do when we load the objects, is figure out

1. where the GOT entries are for the symbols needed by the object, and
2. in which other object those symbols are defined, and what address we've loaded them.

With this, we can populate all of the GOT tables!

Form where we are, this will take:

1. separately adding libraries into the boot procedure, so that they can be separately loaded,
2. adding meta-data for components telling us which libraries they depend on,
3. parsing the elf objects to find out where the relation information is (where the GOT entries are to which symbols),
4. parsing the elf objects to find out where the exported symbols are, and
5. populating the GOTs with this information!

Not a small amount of work, but it certainly will clean up the entire library process.

### PLT

The PLT is a level of indirection to invoke functions in the other binary (i.e. the program calling the library functions).
When you call the desired function, you instead call a *trampoline* function that resolves how to call the real function.
The PLT enables the *lazy* setting of the addresses of those functions by the loader, only when they are called, instead of at load time.
We don't really want this ability.

The PLT also uses the GOT to locate the specific function addresses, so this PLT-level-of-indirection, *also* uses the GOT-level-of-indirection.
But you can compile with `-fno-plt`, yet while maintaining PIE/PLT and the GOT, to enable code generation that doesn't use the PLT, and instead directly uses the GOT instead of calling the trampoline.

The `Makefile` does this:

```sh
LIBFLAGS = -fPIC -fno-plt
MAINFLAGS = -fPIE -pie -fno-plt
```
Autogenerated with command: `grep no-plt Makefile`.

## Copy Relocations

The linker does try to do some unexpected, interesting optimizations.
When global variables defined within the library, are directly accessed in the program, they *can be* moved into the data-section (or bss) of the program!
In this case, the program can access (using the PIC/PIE logic above) the library global variables!
It also means that we'll use the GOT in the library to access its own global variables that have been "copy relocated" into the program.

I don't know why, but these copy entries do appear in the dynamic relocation information:

```sh
Relocation section '.rela.dyn' at offset 0x4b0 contains 9 entries:
```
Autogenerated with command: `readelf -r libgot_lib.so | grep -e  R_X86_64_COPY -e rela.dyn`.

```sh
Relocation section '.rela.dyn' at offset 0x610 contains 14 entries:
000000003dd0  000b00000005 R_X86_64_COPY     0000000000003dd0 fizzbuzz + 0
000000004014  000800000005 R_X86_64_COPY     0000000000004014 bar + 0
000000004018  000900000005 R_X86_64_COPY     0000000000004018 foo + 0
```
Autogenerated with command: `readelf -r got_test | grep -e R_X86_64_COPY -e rela.dyn`.


## Useful references

- https://maskray.me/blog/2021-08-29-all-about-global-offset-table
- https://maskray.me/blog/2021-09-19-all-about-procedure-linkage-table
- https://www.technovelty.org/linux/plt-and-got-the-key-to-code-sharing-and-dynamic-libraries.html

